in the morning of her first day at
school mary is in a foul mood
because she doesn't want to go she wants
frank to continue homeschooling her
but he says he's taught her everything
he knows and she needs the experience
as soon as he sees the reluctant sulking
mary off to school
he's confronted by roberta who's his
landlady and friend
and cares deeply for mary she tells him
to get in his car and bring mary back
before it's too late
afraid that she will be taken away once
everyone realizes she's a child prodigy
frank tries to calm her down saying mary
needs friends and social skills
roberta isn't convinced but there's
nothing she can do
so she lets go at school mary is shown
bored out of her mind as
bonnie her teacher goes over first grade
math problems with the rest of the class
mary eventually speaks up making it
known that the lack of challenge is
beyond her ability to bear
bonnie warns her for speaking out of
turn and starts asking her increasingly
difficult arithmetic problems to make a
point
to her surprise mary answers the mall
after recess
the principal requests a walk-in
observation of bonnie's class
as soon as she introduces herself to the
children mary demands to know if she's
the boss
and upon confirmation demands that she
call frank right away and tell him to
get her out of there
when frank comes to pick mary up bonnie
catches up to him on the front yard and
tells him she thinks mary might be a
gifted child
frank chalks it off to some simple
algorithm he's taught her and
walks away before bonnie can discuss the
matter with him any further
mary has lived with frank a former
college professor turned boat repairman
ever since
in the class one day bonnie gives mary a
hard test
and she can do it all very fast bonnie
then does her own research
and finds out that mary's mother diane
had been a promising mathematician
dedicated to the navy or stokes problem
which is one of the unsolved millennium
prize problems
before taking her own life when mary was
just six months old
on the school bus one day mary witnesses
bullying and she stands up for the
victim
breaking the nose of the bully who's
five years her senior
frank is called to the principal's
office where she tells him
she can get a full ride from mary at a
nearby school for the gifted
frank refuses the offer on the grounds
that she wants mary to have a normal
childhood
evelyn frank's mother and mary's
grandmother shows up at frank's door
soon after
and meets mary for the first time she's
a rich bossy english woman whose
ideas of life and ambition frank clearly
disagrees with
evelyn believes that mary is a one in a
billion mathematical prodigy who should
be specifically tutored in preparation
for a life devoted to mathematics
much as diane was however frank is
animate that his sister would want mary
to be in a normal public school
and have the childhood she didn't have
she criticizes frank's lifestyle choices
and demands to take mary away with her
to boston
when frank disagrees she takes him to
court
in court frank argues that evelyn's
parenting deprived diane of a normal
life
evelyn had sent away a boy diane was in
love with
which was when diane first attempted
suicide evelyn argues that frank is in
no position to be a guardian
working a low-paying job without health
insurance
evelyn takes mary to the boston
university the professor is so surprised
that mary can find the mistake in his
math problem and solve it
worried that the judge will rule against
him and he will lose mary completely
frank accepts a compromise brokered by
his lawyer greg cohen
that sees mary placed in foster care and
attend the private school where evelyn
wants to have her enrolled
the foster parents live 25 minutes from
frank's home
and frank will be entitled to schedule
visits and mary will be able to decide
where she wants to live
after her 12th birthday mary burst into
tears and is devastated at being placed
in foster care
and her foster father says she refuses
to see frank
when bonnie sees a picture of fred up
for adoption she alerts frank
frank retrieves the cat from the pound
and learning that fred was brought in
due to allergy issues realizes that
evelyn who is allergic to cats
is overseeing mary's education in the
guest house of mary's foster home
he then reveals to evelyn who had been a
mathematician herself
that diane had solved the navy or stokes
problem but stipulated that the solution
was to be withheld
until evelyn's death knowing that it
meant everything to evelyn to see diane
solve the problem
frank offers evelyn the opportunity to
publish diane's work
if she drops her objection to him having
custody of mary
evelyn agrees evelyn is shocked and in
tears when she sees
all of diane's letters showing how she
hated her
the film ends with mary back in frank's
custody returning to public school
and socializing with children her age
while taking college level courses
you